Independent Study:
Independent Study is designed to provide the student with a unique learning experience not achievable by ordinary course work. You must identify a member of the University’s Standing Faculty who is willing to direct your independent study and take responsibility for issuing your final grade.

Occasionally, you may wish to (or need to) undertake Independent Study credit as part of an Internship experience, in which case you must still produce a tangible, academically-based product for your grade and credit at the end of the internship. If approved, you will be registered for a “0099” course within your academic department (e.g. MEAM 0099) for 1.0 CU of credit, for a grade (not PF).

You must submit an application for Independent Study by the end of the add period. Please access the Application for Independent Study on the forms page here.

Students are limited to 2.0 CUs of Independent Study within an Undergraduate Degree.

Note: In order to be eligible for Independent Study, students must be actively enrolled and taking courses at Penn toward their degree.

Forms:
CIS 0099 Registration Form
Independent Study is designed to provide a student with a unique learning experience not achievable by ordinary course work. You must identify a member of the University’s Standing Faculty who is willing to direct your independent study and take responsibility for issuing your final grade. CIS 0099: Independent Study is a 1CU course which must be taken for a grade.

Before you register for an Independent Study, talk with the CIS Academic Advising staff or your faculty advisor about how this CIS 0099 credit will apply to your degree requirements. Also note the SEAS Independent Study rules.

International students wanting to register for CPT should use a different form.

In consultation with your Project Advisor, formulate a Project Proposal (which must be uploaded as a PDF). The Project Proposal should be a brief document, consisting of:

Introduction
Statement of the problem or objective of the project
Results expected
Manner of presentation of results (e.g. a final written report, demonstration, etc.)
Method of evaluation for project for grade
References (where appropriate)
If your Project Advisor does not have an academic appointment in the CIS Department, but your project is computer-science focused, please contact the CIS Undergraduate Chair to discuss how to proceed.

202530
Semester
Project advisor name
Project advisor name
Project advisor email
Project advisor email
Project title
Project title
Upload project proposal

Drag and drop PDF here, or click to select