CIS 3200: Introduction to Algorithms (Spring ’25)
General Information
Instructor: Sanjeev Khanna (sanjeev@cis.upenn.edu)
Office hours: Mon & Wed: 5:00 – 6:00 pm.
TAs: We have a great team of TAs:
Skyler Cheung (skcheung@seas.upenn.edu), Sophie Courtney (sophieyl@wharton.upenn.edu),
Mahika Calyanakoti (mahika@seas.upenn.edu), James Doh (dohj0109@seas.upenn.edu),
Viraj Doshi (viraj108@seas.upenn.edu), William Guo (willguo6@seas.upenn.edu), Eugene Halim
(ehalim@sas.upenn.edu), Sahishnu Hanumolu (hsahi@seas.upenn.edu), Vignesh Lakshmanan
(vigneshl@seas.upenn.edu), Kaily Liu (liukaily@seas.upenn.edu), Andrew Lukashchuk
(aluk@seas.upenn.edu), Ethan Ma (ethanma@seas.upenn.edu), Kayan Mohamed (kayan25@seas.upenn.edu),
Brendan Nguyen (bmnguyen@seas.upenn.edu), Karthik Padmanabhan (ksai@seas.upenn.edu),
Hwi-Sang (Joseph) Cho (hwisang@seas.upenn.edu), Eshan Singhal (esinghal@seas.upenn.edu),
Royce Sun (roycesun@sas.upenn.edu), Avinash (Avi) Upadhyayula (aviu@sas.upenn.edu), Ethan
Weisberg (ethaniw@seas.upenn.edu), Rayan Yu (rayanyu@wharton.upenn.edu), Katherine Yue
(kyue@seas.upenn.edu), Cynthia Zhang (cynzhang@wharton.upenn.edu).
Cynthia and Skyler are the head TAs for our class. We will soon post a detailed TA office
hour schedule. Office hours will start from next week.
Textbook: Introduction to Algorithms by Cormen, Leiserson, Rivest, and Stein, fourth edition,
2022.
Website: There is a Canvas website for the course where you can find course handouts. The
course calendar on Canvas will contain a summary of topics covered in each lecture along with
a reading list. You can also access all course postings through the Course calendar. We will
use Ed Discussions for online clarifications related to the homeworks and other course material.
Course Organization
Homeworks: There will be 6 homeworks, worth a total of 24% of the grade. Typically,
homeworks will be given on Mondays and will be due exactly 2 weeks later, at the beginning
of the Monday class. The first homework will be posted online on Canvas on Monday,
January 20 and will be due on Monday, Feb 3. The release dates for the remaining
homeworks are Feb 3, Feb 17, Mar 17, Mar 31, and Apr 14.
Midterms: Midterm 1 is on Wednesday, Feb 26, and Midterm 2 is on Wednesday, April 9;
each midterm is worth 20% of the grade. They will be held during the class time.
Final: The final exam will be held in accordance with the schedule decided by the Penn
registrar’s office. It is worth 36% of the grade.
All exams will be closed-book and closed-notes.
1
Course Policies
• You are allowed to work on the homeworks in groups of up to 3 students. But you
must write your solutions independently! Please write names of all the students in
your group when submitting the homework.
• You may consult class notes and the text for solving homework problems but no other
resources are allowed. Any violations of this policy may be referred to the Office of
Student Conduct.
• You must typeset your homework. We will provide you with Latex template for
writing homework solutions. Homeworks are to be submitted via Gradescope.
• Please do not ask for extensions: you are allowed to submit two homeworks of your
choice up to 48 hours late without penalty. So, for instance, if the HW is due on a
Monday by 3:30 PM, you can submit it by Wednesday, 3:30 PM the same week if you
choose to use one of the two allowed extensions. You do not need to ask permission
to use this extension. Just indicate on the first page of your homework that you are
using an extension. You will not receive any credit for a homework submitted more than
48 hours after the original due date. You will lose 25 points on the HW if you use a
48-hour extension beyond the 2 allowed extensions. No homeworks will be accepted past
the 48 hour extension from the due date.
• Use your extensions wisely! It helps to save an extension for the end of the semester
crunch. My advice: avoid taking an extension on the first two homeworks.
• No electronic devices (cellphones, laptops, tablets) during the class. The only
exception to this is if you are using a laptop or tablet for note-taking – please make sure
that your usage is strictly limited to note-taking.
Topics
Sorting, Selection, and Data Structures: mergesort, quicksort, counting sort, median
selection and order statistics, heaps, hash tables, binary search trees.
Design Techniques: divide and conquer, dynamic programming,
greedy algorithms, randomization.
Graph Algorithms: graph traversal and applications, minimum
spanning trees, shortest paths, network flows.
Advanced Topics: NP-completeness, approximation algorithms.
Time Permitting: Machine-learning algorithms; Linear programming; an introduction
to sublinear algorithms for very large data sets.