CIS 6010: Special Topics in Computer Architecture: GPGPU Architecture and Programming Fall 2022
Course Information
instructor: Joe Devietti
when: Tuesday/Thursday 10:15-11:45am
where: Towne 311
contact: email, canvas

office hours:

Thursdays noon-1pm, Levine 572
Course Description
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) have become extremely popular and are used to accelerate an increasingly diverse set of non-graphics workloads. This seminar will examine modern GPU architectures, the programming models used to write general-purpose code for GPUs, and the complexities of programming such highly parallel architectures. There will be a special emphasis on concurrency correctness issues as they relate to GPUs, including GPU memory consistency models and GPU concurrency bugs. Graduate-level coursework in computer architecture (e.g., CIS 5710) will be very helpful.

Course Materials
No textbooks are required; links to all readings will be provided at this website.

Grading
Project: 40%
Participation: 30%
Assignments: 20%
Reading quizzes: 10%
There will be no exams.

Submit homework, reading quizzes and future-work write-ups via Canvas.

The class project can be done in groups of up to 2. The project is open-ended: it should be something related to GPUs but the specifics are up to you. Choosing a project that incorporates your interests (research or otherwise) is a great idea!


Below is a list of the topics only:

Intro

General-Purpose Graphics Processor Architectures (Chapters 1 & 2)

Sections 3.1–3.3

Sections 3.4–3.6

Chapter 4

Real-world GPU design

CUDA Programming Guide

CUDA synchronization

A Primer on Memory Consistency and Cache Coherence (Chapters 3–5; SC, TSO, RC)

MCM Primer

Heterogeneous-Race-Free Memory Models

GPU concurrency: Weak Behaviours and Programming Assumptions

Dynamic Warp Formation

A Formal Analysis of the NVIDIA PTX Memory Consistency Model

Cache Coherence for GPU Architectures

Cache-Conscious Wavefront Scheduling

SIMR: Single Instruction Multiple Request Processing for Energy-Efficient Data Center Microservices

Understanding the Security of Discrete GPUs

GPUfs: Integrating a File System with GPUs

GPUnet: Networking Abstractions for GPU Programs
